---
description: Establishment and constitution of the supreme court
---

### Establishment and constitution of the supreme court

1. <div style="text-align: justify"> There shall be a supreme court of India consisting of a chief justice of India and until parliament by law prescribes a larger number, not more than seven other judges.
2. <div style="text-align: justify"> Every judge of the supreme court shall be appointed by the president by warrant under a hand and seal on the recommendation of the National Judicial Appointments Commission referred to in Article 124A and shall hold office until the judge attains the age of sixty-five years, provided that:
    1. A judge may, by writing and hand-addressing to the president, resign the office;
    2. A judge may be removed from the office in the manner provided in clause (4).
3. <div style="text-align: justify"> The age of a judge of the supreme court shall be determined by such authority and in such manner as parliament may by law provide.
4. <div style="text-align: justify"> A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a judge of the supreme court unless the person is a citizen of India and:
    1. has been for at least five years a judge of a high court or two or more such courts in succession; or
    2. has been for at least ten years an advocate of a high court or two or more such courts in succession; or
    3. is, in the opinion of the president, a distinguished jurist.

    ??? info "Explanation 1"

        In this clause, "high court'' means a high court that exercises, or at any time before the commencement of this constitution exercised, jurisdiction in any part of the territory of India.

    ??? info "Explanation 2"

        In computing for this clause the period during which a person has been an advocate, any period during which a person has held judicial office not inferior to that of a district judge after the person became an advocate shall be included.

5. <div style="text-align: justify"> A judge of the supreme court shall not be removed from the office except by an order of the president passed after an address by each house of parliament supported by a majority of the total membership of that house and by a majority of not less than two-thirds of the members of that house present and voting has been presented to the president in the same session for such removal on the ground of proved misbehaviour or incapacity.
6. <div style="text-align: justify"> Parliament may by law regulate the procedure for the presentation of an address and for the investigation and proof of the misbehaviour or incapacity of a judge under clause (4).
7. <div style="text-align: justify"> Every person appointed to be a judge of the supreme court shall, before entering the office, make and subscribe before the president, or some person appointed on that behalf by the president, an oath or affirmation according to the form set out for the purpose in Schedule 3.
8. <div style="text-align: justify"> No person who has held office as a judge of the supreme court shall plead or act in any court or before any authority within the territory of India.
